After trying every other way to play the game, after closing plants, trimming staff, redesigning production plans and squeezing dollars here and there, Jay Hedges is trying another tack.

Armed with details about the metal clamps made at his Galesburg plant, he is headed for Europe, hoping to find customers who will help rescue his small auto-parts company from the fierce competition and great uncertainty at home. ``Anyone who sees the short-term future for the (U.S.) auto industry would not like to be dependent on them,`` said Hedges, executive vice president of Wittek Cos. International. If his name sounds familiar, it may be because Hedges is the former director of the Illinois Department of Commerce and Community Affairs.



To stay competitive, his company has gone to 344 workers from 750 three years ago, closing plants this year in Chicago, suburban LaGrange and Pineville, N.C. before opening the new facility in Galesburg.

His search for overseas clients is symptomatic of the plight of the U.S. auto-parts industry, a sprawling hodge-podge of conglomerates and mom-and-pop shops that employs more than 400,000 workers, a large portion of them in the auto-dependent Midwest.

The industry is squeezed like never before from within and without. And when the squeeze is over, many firms won`t be around to enjoy the recovery.

``There are less and less competitors, but the competitors are more fierce. The strong who have survived are positioning themselves for those who will last and who will not,`` said Mike Mills, an official with Jernberg Industries Inc., a Chicago auto-parts firm that has seen its orders drop by 10 percent so far this year.

Before the low point of the auto industry`s slump late last year, 700 of the nation`s major auto-parts firms lost $1.1 billion in the first three quarters of 1990, according to the U.S. Department of Commerce.

The auto-parts firms are under pressure from the nation`s Big Three automakers to lower costs. At the same time they are stuck with losses or flat profits due to the massive cutbacks in parts purchased by the automakers.

Yet the price cuts are just part of the automakers` challenge, which industry experts predict will lead to a restructuring and further winnowing of the already diminished industry.

The automakers want suppliers to do more of their own engineering, a costly request to be sure. They also want firms to form alliances with them, copying the Japanese style in which automakers work closely with parts makers. But many auto-parts firms are reluctant to swear absolute loyalty to one automaker. Parts executives say they do not trust the car companies and fear they will resort to their old tactics of short-term buying and cut-throat bidding.

An example of the automakers streamlining of their supply base is Chrysler Corp.`s plans for its LH-model car, which will go into production next year. It will have only 170 supply firms as compared to more than 2,000 for many other Chrysler models.

The car companies are essentially forcing the supply firms to set up their own supply chains and, as a result, build whole systems of parts based on the work of many manufacturers.


Adding to the auto-parts firms` woes are extra pressures that did not exist before.

First there is the presence of the seven Japanese automakers in the U.S. and the string of more than 240 Japanese auto-parts firms that have followed them.

U.S. auto-parts firms have not had much success selling to the Japanese transplant firms. Transplants now account for 11 percent of all vehicle sales in the U.S. That figure is expected to grow to 16 percent by 1994, according to a University of Michigan study.

The other threat comes from the contract between the United Auto Workers and the major automakers. The firms are required to pay workers whether or not there is work, an incentive for the auto companies to build their own parts.

``This is a new club that wasn`t there before,`` said Sean McAlinden of the University of Michigan`s Center for the Study of Automotive

Transportation. ``The firms can go to the suppliers and say we are paying these people anyway. We could have them doing your job.``

Such a threat, he added, is more likely from General Motors Corp., which has the greatest capacity to build its own parts.

Then there is the worldwide auto recession. Despite the hopes of some auto-parts officials like Jay Hedges, U.S. auto-parts makers cannot easily turn towards overseas markets as they once did.

``In the past, North America might have been down, while the European market was booming. But unfortunately this recession is very global,`` said John P. Reilly, president and chief executive officer of Tenneco Automotive, the nation`s largest manufacturer of shocks and exhaust systems.

Driven by the decline in auto production, his firm, based in suburban Lincolnshire, has laid off about 10 percent of its 16,000 workers worldwide in the last year.

Bridgestone Corp
has agreed to plead guilty and to pay a $425 million
criminal fine for its role in a conspiracy to fix prices on
certain automotive parts, the U.S. Department of Justice said on
Thursday.



The case involved anti-vibration rubber parts sold in the
United States and elsewhere to Toyota Motor Corp,
Nissan Motor Corp, Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd,
Suzuki Motor Corp, Isuzu Motors Ltd and
certain of their subsidiaries and affiliates.

The agreement is subject to court approval.

In a statement, Bridgestone said its management "sincerely
regrets the actions that resulted in this plea agreement and
that they did not discover these activities at an earlier date."
Certain antitrust violations had taken place as long ago as
2001, the company said.

Law enforcement authorities in the United States and
elsewhere have so far brought price-fixing cases related to auto
parts ranging from seat belts to power window motors.

Including Bridgestone, 26 companies have pleaded guilty or
agreed to plead guilty to price fixing or bid rigging. The
investigation has levied more than $2 billion in fines.

In October 2011, Bridgestone pleaded guilty and paid a $28
million fine for price-fixing and Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
violations in the marine hose industry.

It did not disclose at the time of the plea that it had also
participated in the anti-vibration rubber parts conspiracy, the
Department of Justice said, and that failure to disclose was a
factor in determining the latest fine.

"The Antitrust Division will take a hard line when repeat
offenders fail to disclose additional anticompetitive behavior,"
said Brent Snyder, deputy assistant attorney general for the
Antitrust Division's criminal enforcement program.

Bridgestone said it plans to record a special loss of 44.79
billion yen (about $438 million) for the fiscal year ended Dec.
31, 2013.

The company said it plans "appropriate disciplinary action"
against certain employees responsible for the activities. Some
board members and corporate officers will also forgo bonus
payments scheduled to be made in March.

Suited up in crimson soccer togs, eager to join his company's weekly match at an indoor arena in Hoffman Estates, Chinese business executive Pin Ni took a few minutes to reflect on his latest plunge into unknown waters.

Two decades ago, he led China's largest auto-parts-maker into the Chicago region, establishing a sprawling U.S. beachhead for the company and making a name for himself as a trailblazer in the process. Now he is again poised to be a front-runner in the realm of Chinese foreign investment, taking the American subsidiary he heads on a risky new journey, a sort of "Globalization, Phase Two."



After buying and revitalizing failing U.S. auto parts companies as Detroit was cratering, Elgin-based Wanxiang America Corp. is encouraging some of those operations to produce and sell goods in developing markets, including its corporate home base of China, as well as Brazil, India and Russia.

While Chinese companies continue snapping up firms in the U.S. market — including Lenovo's agreement last week to buy Chicago-based Motorola Mobility — "using the U.S. to springboard to other markets is a pretty new development," said Thilo Hanemann, research director for Rhodium Group, which tracks Chinese investment here.

Ni, a tireless executive who combines a genial, easygoing manner with a ferocious competitive drive, is a prime example of a new way of thinking in the Chicago area, in which business leaders must look far beyond the region and navigate the global economy's shifting tides. His company's new paradigm mirrors Chicago's own need to think globally to remain competitive.

As Ni sat tracking the soccer game, noting his team's missteps, he explained his motivation: "We came here early, and we had a huge advantage being well-connected with China. But that advantage is going away. We need to be globalized — otherwise, there is certain business we are not going to be able to get."

Ni's competitive instincts are not to be taken lightly. As Wanxiang America's president, Ni parlayed an initial personal investment of about $20,000 into a $3 billion-a-year conglomerate with interests in auto parts, clean energy, private equity investment and real estate.

The real estate arm has taken advantage of a depressed market, investing about $2 billion in far-flung projects, including marquee developments like Google's new offices under development in West Town.

The company, identified by Rhodium as among the top seven Chinese investors in the state, says it has invested $1 billion in Illinois, where it has six operations employing about 750 people, of an overall workforce of 12,500.

As Wanxiang (pronounced Wahn-shung) became established here, Ni befriended then-Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley, whom he counts as a mentor, as well as myriad state and local officials. Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel has sought his counsel on how to attract more Chinese investment. Ni's advice: Make the city feel like home to visiting Chinese.

If Wanxiang America's plans to leapfrog into developing markets lead to rocketing sales, as Ni predicts, the Chicago region stands to gain as well. The region would pick up a heftier international corporate citizen that can make greater investments, hire more staff and pay more taxes. Government officials already point to Wanxiang America when touting the region to potential foreign investors, but accelerating growth would make it a shinier example.

Last year Ni won a protracted fight to acquire high-tech battery-maker A123 Systems, effectively working political channels to diffuse concern that U.S. technology would fall into foreign hands. Ultimately, A123's military work, a small slice of its business, was split off ahead of the deal and sold to a different company. Wanxiang is betting its A123 acquisition will foster inroads into the electric vehicle market, most likely in China first — a long-held corporate goal.


In pursuing A123, Ni "understood the need for professional advisers and sought them out," said attorney and China expert John Rogers.

Wanxiang America engaged the services of high-profile Washington, D.C., law firm Covington & Burling LLP, where Eric Holder was a partner before joining President Barack Obama's administration as attorney general. Ni "basically showed other Chinese companies those deals can be done if they are handled in the right way," Hanemann said. "He didn't walk away as other Chinese companies have in the past, blaming national security hurdles."

And now, Ni, 49, is engaged in a battle for bankrupt Fisker Automotive, facing off against Hong Kong businessman Richard Li. Wanxiang's goal is to restart production of the Karma plug-in hybrid sports car, which uses A123 batteries, and shift production from Finland to Auburn Hills, Mich.